---
title: The Outer Limits of Reason
---

**************************
The Outer Limits of Reason
**************************


.. image:: https://images.gr-assets.com/books/1381287623l/17841838.jpg

----

**The Outer Limits of Reason** is as far as I remember one of the best research
essay that I have read so far. I definitely recommend the book to all inquiring
minds around and to anyone who is too much confident about him/her-self
knowledge.

Noson S. Yanofsky confirmed his knowledge page by page and with astonishing
clarity explain hard topic such as Chaos, Relativity Theory and Quantum
Mechanics. As a graduate student of Computer Science and Engineering I have
found really well written explanations about theoretical computer science. Not
for nothing Yanofsky is Professor in the Department of Computer and Information
Science at Brooklyn College and The Graduate Center of the City University of
New York.

Awards
------

Winner, 2013 American Publishers Award for Professional and Scholarly Excellence
(PROSE Award) in Popular Science & Popular Mathematics, presented by the
Professional and Scholarly Publishing Division of the Association of American
Publishers

Quotes
------

*Science is a human activity. It is created by finite, flawed human beings
attempting to search for the ultimate truth.*

----

*The mathematics becomes abstract and about nothing in particular. Because these
concepts are about nothing, they are about everything.*

----

*Rather than asking why the laws of physics follow mathematics, ask why there are
any laws at all.*

----

*When we talk about the limits of scientific reasoning, we must keep in mind how
we are observing the universe...the way we look at the universe is the way it
will present itself to us.*

----

*Do not mistake the metaphor for reality.*

----

**SPOILER**: Yanofsky conclusion thought

*We human beings already live beyond reason. Real life has importance only when
it includes ethics, values, and beauty. Reason is a powerful but nevertheless
limited tool.*

Table Of Contents
-----------------


+ Introduction                                    ``1``

+ Language Pradoxes                               ``15``

  - Liar! Liar!                                   ``15``
  - Self-Referential Paradoxes                    ``19``
  - Naming Numbers                                ``26``

+ Philosophical Conundrums                        ``31``

  - Ships, People, and Other Objects              ``31``
  - Hangin' with Zeno and GÃ¶del                   ``41``
  - Bald Men, Heaps, and Vagueness                ``50``
  - Knowing about Knowing                         ``57``

+ Infinity puzzles                                ``65``

  - Sets and Sizes                                ``66``
  - Infinite Sets                                 ``69``
  - Anything Larger?                              ``76``
  - Knowable and Unknowable                       ``85``

+ Computing Complexities                          ``97``

  - Some Easy Problems                            ``98``
  - Some Hard Problems                            ``109``
  - They're All Connected                         ``121``
  - Almost Solving Hard Problems                  ``129``
  - Even Harder Problems                          ``131``

+ Computing Impossibilities                       ``135``

  - Algorithms, Computers, Machines, and Programs ``136``
  - To Halt or Not to Halt?                       ``139``
  - They're All Connected                         ``146``
  - A Hierarchy of the Unknown                    ``152``
  - Minds, Brains, and Computers                  ``157``

+ Scientific Limitations                          ``161``

  - Chaos and Cosmos                              ``161``
  - Quantum Mechanics                             ``175``
  - Relativity Theory                             ``214``

+ Metascientific Perplexities                     ``235``

  - Philosophical Limitations of Science          ``235``
  - Science and Methamatics                       ``252``
  - The Origin of Reason                          ``272``

+ Mathematical Obstructions                       ``297``

  - Classical limits                              ``298``
  - Galois Theory                                 ``304``
  - Harder Than Halting                           ``309``
  - Logic                                         ``320``
  - Axioms and Independence                       ``331``

+ Beyond Reason                                   ``339``

  - Summing Up                                    ``339``
  - Defining Reason                               ``345``
  - Peering Beyond                                ``349``

+ Notes                                           ``355``

+ Bibliography                                    ``379``

+ Index                                           ``393``
